For this particular assignment we were tasked with creating a Monte Carlo
Version of the provided algorithm. So for my implementation the time that the
algorithm takes to converge is painstakingly slow. Much, much slower than the
Gradient Descent algorithm. I sort of expected it to be slow, but I did not
expect it to be this slow. One of the main reasons that this algorithm is so
slow is because of the snippet of code below.


This snippet of code is the main logic behind my algorithm. The reason that this
particular piece of code takes so much longer is that we are using a
non-deterministic method in order to try and solve the problem. While the
gradient descent iterates a definite amounts of times per iteration. The
Monte Carlo has no such upper limit. Given that each time through the algorithm
it must iterate until it reaches an edge those points in the middle will take
a large amount of time in order to complete their journey to the edge. In
addition as we increase the size of the graph this only makes the algorithm have
to work more. Given that points in the center of graph are further away from the
edge it will take much longer to reach the edge.

Another thing that really is difficult with this algorithm is that the
difference between the previous value at the spot and the current may jump
around quite a bit, Because this does not always decrease it can be a real pain
to have to calculate. In fact I think if I tried it on a large array like
40 by 40, I would most likely overflow the numbers as I am taking the weighted
average and calculation how many previous iteration I have taken would be a
very large number. One thing that can be done to try and combat this to increase
the number of times that you run the algorithm per given iteration. While this
helps due to the Law of Large Numbers again you run into the problem of this
algorithm, as written, taking a long time. 


Looking at the graph above we can clearly see the trend that as you increase the
optimization level the time required to run the algorithm decreases as well too.
In the previous assignment we saw that as the optimization level increased, that
didn't always correspond in an increase in time.
As stated above this particular experiment used 4 threads; one of the things
that using 4 threads allows us to do is that we can take advantage assigning
each thread to its own core. This allows each thread to take advantage of cache
locality when iterating through the for loops. In addition when the compiler
optimizes the code each OpenMP thread receives the optimized code. This allows
each of the threads to run that optimized code, and results in further speed
ups.

In order to try and determine what lead to such a drop in the speed I compiled
the program at optimization level one and then using the following site
<a>https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Optimize-Options.html</a> I applied
each one the optimizations to the program and made it. While lots of
optimizations decreased the time bit by bit I noticed that the
<b>-fcaller-saves</b> decreased the amount of time that the code to run by about
2 seconds.


For this particular problem the data was collected by running the supplied code
compiled with optimization level two on the schools system. As before the basis
of our  time measurement comes from the in code timing hooks.


The results for this problem are certainly very surprising. I ran the test
multiple times because I was in such disbelief about the results, but despite
this the results remained the same.

It would appear that as we up until 12 threads we were getting the results that
we expected as more threads were added a gradual decrease in time take was
achieved. However, when using 13 to 16 threads the number of time it takes
skyrockets. Using the <b>lscpu</b> command we can determine that our CPU is a
Intel® Xeon® Processor E5-2630 v3 (20M Cache, 2.40 GHz), from the manufacturer's
spec sheet we that this has 8 physical cores while supporting 16 threads;
through hyperthreading each core has two threads. Using the Scalasca utility I
was able to determine which lines the thread was spending most of its time. The
screen shot below is from the results I gathered.

From the above screenshots we see that indeed making the code not wait did have
a significant difference. However, it did not speed it up to the speeds of the
ten thread run. So while we were able to speed up the speed a good amount we
still see that there is a lot of difference between running the code with 14
threads and 10 threads. This leads me to believe that the code is not being
optimized well by OpenMP. Another interesting observation is that the poor
timing continues up until the maximum number of threads has been reached, and
then immediately after that the numbers return a decent level. I would suspect
that there is sub-optimal distribution of the work going on with the threads.

In addition one of the things that I thought might be hindering the performance
is that as we increase the number of threads and each core now shares multiple
threads the cache will get written over much more frequently resulting in more
cache misses. This doesn't explain the results that we saw, with there being
a sharp jump in time, but it could be a contributing factor.
